---
layout: default
title: 02.b - Python Modules and Packages
parent: Week 02 - Processing files using functions, classes, and libraries
grand_parent: Lectures
nav_order: 6
---

## Python Modules
[Python Modules](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_modules.htm)

A module allows you to logically organize your Python code. Grouping related code into a module makes the code easier to understand and use. A module is a Python object with arbitrarily named attributes that you can bind and reference.

Simply, a module is a file consisting of Python code. A module can define functions, classes and variables. A module can also include runnable code.

### The import Statement

You can use any Python source file as a module by executing an import statement in some other Python source file. The import has the following syntax

```python
import module1[, module2[,... moduleN]
```

When the interpreter encounters an import statement, it imports the module if the module is present in the search path. A search path is a list of directories that the interpreter searches before importing a module. For example, to import the module support.py, you need to put the following command at the top of the script


```python
# Import module support
import support

# Now you can call defined function that module as follows
support.print_func("drk")
```

    Hello : drk


A module is loaded only once, regardless of the number of times it is imported. This prevents the module execution from happening over and over again if multiple imports occur.

### The from...import Statement

Python's from statement lets you import specific attributes from a module into the current namespace. The from...import has the following syntax

```python
from modname import name1[, name2[, ... nameN]]
```

For example, to import the function fibonacci from the module fib, use the following statement −

```python
from fib import fibonacci
```

This statement does not import the entire module fib into the current namespace; it just introduces the item fibonacci from the module fib into the global symbol table of the importing module.

### The from...import * Statement

It is also possible to import all names from a module into the current namespace by using the following import statement

```python
from modname import *
```

This provides an easy way to import all the items from a module into the current namespace; however, this statement should be used sparingly.

### Locating Modules

When you import a module, the Python interpreter searches for the module in the following sequences −

* The current directory.
* If the module isn't found, Python then searches each directory in the shell variable PYTHONPATH.
* If all else fails, Python checks the default path. On UNIX, this default path is normally /usr/local/lib/python/.

The module search path is stored in the system module sys as the sys.path variable. The sys.path variable contains the current directory, PYTHONPATH, and the installation-dependent default.

## Python Packages

A package is a hierarchical file directory structure that defines a single Python application environment that consists of modules and subpackages and sub-subpackages, and so on.

Consider a file Pots.py available in Phone directory. This file has following line of source code −

```python
def Pots():
   print "I'm Pots Phone"
```

Similar way, we have another two files having different functions with the same name as above −

* Phone/Isdn.py file having function Isdn()
* Phone/G3.py file having function G3()
* Now, create one more file __init__.py in Phone directory

To make all of your functions available when you've imported Phone, you need to put explicit import statements in __init__.py as follows

```python
from Pots import Pots
from Isdn import Isdn
from G3 import G3
```

After you add these lines to __init__.py, you have all of these classes available when you import the Phone package.


```python
# Now import your Phone Package.
import Phone as p
```


```python
p.Pots()
```

    I'm a Pots Phone.



```python
p.Isdn()
```

    I'm an Isdn phone.



```python
p.G3()
```

    I'm a G3 phone.



```python

```
